SOURCE: https://www.sos.ca.gov/elections
============================================================
Elections Voter Registration Voting Options Voter Education and Outreach Resources Elections Primary Election - June 2, 2026 The last day to register to vote for the June 2, 2026, Primary Election is May 18, 2026. All California active registered voters will receive a vote-by-mail ballot for the June 2, 2026, Primary Election. Your county elections office will begin mailing ballots by May 4, 2026. Ballot drop-off locations open on May 5, 2026. Vote-by-mail ballots can be returned by mail, at a drop-off location, or your county elections office. Vote centers open for early in-person voting in all Voter’s Choice Act counties beginning on May 23, 2026. Vote-by-mail ballots must be postmarked on or before Election Day and received by June 9, 2026. Voter Registration The below links include information about voter registration eligibility, how to register to vote, and how to check your voter registration status, and more. Voter Registration If you are eligible to vote in California, you can apply to register to vote right now by completing the online application. The application is available in English, Spanish, Chinese, Hindi, Japanese, Khmer, Korean, Tagalog, Thai, and Vietnamese. My Voter Status To find out if you are currently registered to vote, visit My Voter Status. Who Can Vote in California To register to vote in California, you must be: a United States citizen and a resident of California, 18 years old or older on Election Day, not currently serving a state or federal prison term for the conviction of a felony, and not currently found mentally incompetent to vote by a court. Voting Rights Restored If you are a person with a prior felony conviction, find out if you are eligible to register to vote in California by using our Voting Rights Restored tool. Voting Rights: Persons Subject to Conservatorship Elections code requires that an individual with a disability who is under a conservatorship be permitted to register to vote unless that individual has been disqualified from voting. Elections code also requires that an individual with a disability, who is otherwise qualified to vote but needs accommodations to complete an affidavit of voter registration, be granted such necessary accommodations to the extent they are reasonable. Pre-register at 16. Vote at 18. Online pre-registration is now available for eligible 16 and 17 year olds by visiting registertovote.ca.gov. California youth who pre-register to vote will have their registration become active once they turn 18 years old. Military & Overseas Voters Thank you for taking part in elections while you are in the military or other uniformed service, or a civilian living outside the United States. As a military or overseas voter who is registered to vote, there are several different ways you can request and receive your ballot and return your voted ballot and signed Military and Overseas Voter Return Envelope. Safe At Home If you are enrolled in California's confidential address program, Safe At Home, please do not apply to register to vote online. Contact the Safe At Home program toll-free at (877) 322-5227 or by the Safe At Home email. Political Parties For information on qualified political parties, political party statements of purpose, no party preference information, how to qualify a political party, and political bodies attempting to qualify, visit Political Parties. Guide to Voter Registration Drives The Secretary of State’s Guide to Voter Registration Drives is designed to help political parties, voter registration drive coordinators, petition management companies, circulators, and volunteers understand their responsibilities and requirements when helping people register to vote. Anyone distributing voter registration cards in California should be familiar with the rules and regulations for conducting voter registration drives National Voter Registration Act (NVRA) The National Voter Registration Act (NVRA) has two major aspects related to voter registration: maintaining accurate voter rolls through list maintenance and ensuring every eligible citizen has the opportunity to register to vote through the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) and designated NVRA Voter Registration Agencies (VRAs). VoteCal VoteCal is California’s centralized voter registration database that provides benefits to voters and election officials. Voters can access certain public portions of VoteCal to apply to register to vote or update their voter registration record, find their polling place, or to see if their vote-by-mail or provisional ballot was counted by their county elections official and, if it wasn't, the reason why it wasn't. For more information, visit VoteCal. Same Day Voter Registration (Conditional Voter Registration) Same Day Voter Registration, known as Conditional Voter Registration in state law, is a safety net for Californians who miss the deadline to register to vote or update their voter registration information for an election. For more information, visit Same Day Voter Registration (Conditional Voter Registration). Frequently Asked Questions If you have any questions such as how to change your political party, if you need a California driver license or California identification card to apply online, or what to do if you have just moved within California, visit Frequently Asked Questions or contact the Secretary of State's Elections Division at (800) 345-VOTE (8683) or by email. Voting Options The below links include information about ways to vote, how to vote by mail, assistance for voters with disabilities, information about California’s Voter’s Choice Act, and information about voting technology. You will also find FAQs to assist you in the voting process. Vote By Mail County elections officials mail vote-by-mail ballots to all active registered voters. Any registered voter may vote using a vote-by-mail ballot instead of going to the polls on Election Day. For information on vote-by-mail ballots, including checking the status of your ballot or requesting a replacement ballot, please visit Vote By Mail. Language Requirements for Election Materials Language requirements for election materials are governed under the federal Voting Rights Act and the state Elections Code. Remote Accessible Vote-by-Mail (RAVBM) A Remote Accessible Vote by Mail (RAVBM) system allows voters to mark their selections using their own compatible technology to vote independently and privately in the comfort of their own home. For more information on how to request or use a RAVBM, please visit Remote Accessible Vote-by-Mail (RAVBM). Voters with Disabilities Your vote matters! Find information on the Voter Bill of Rights and how to fill out a California voter regsitration card in American Sign language. Get information on curbside voting, accessible voting machines and other helpful information about accessible voting. Voter's Choice Act Established by Senate Bill 450 (2016), the California Voter's Choice Act (VCA) modernizes elections in California by allowing counties to conduct elections under a model which provides greater flexibility and convenience for voters. This election model allows voters to choose how, when, and where to cast their ballot. Voting in California As a voter, you will help decide who will lead us. You make your voice heard on important issues that affect the future of our state and nation. Every time you use your precious right to vote, our democracy grows stronger. At Voting in California, you can apply to register to vote or fill in a printable vote-by-mail application, find your polling place and learn what to expect on Election Day. Voting Technology The Office of Voting Systems Technology Assessment (OVSTA) was created in September 2005. When created, OVSTA was charged with two main responsibilities: 1) voting system examination, testing, and certification for use in California elections; and 2) overseeing the approval of ballot printers, as well as authorizing and monitoring the manufacture and distribution of ballots for an election. Over the years, that scope has expanded to voting technologies including ePollBooks and Remote Accessible Vote by Mail Systems. Where and How to Vote Any registered voter in California can decide whether to vote at a polling place or vote by mail. To learn more on ways you can vote in California elections, visit Where and How to Vote. Frequently Asked Questions If you have any questions such as how to change your political party, if you need a California driver license or California identification card to apply online, or what to do if you have just moved within California, visit Frequently Asked Questions or contact the Secretary of State's Elections Division at (800) 345-VOTE (8683) or by email. Voter Education and Outreach The California Secretary of State's office offers a variety of resources about voting and civic engagement, including joining the Voter's Choice Act ambassador program, working as a poll worker, and supporting young voters through student-focused initiatives. California Student Mock Election Young people have the potential to be a powerful force in elections, but only if they get involved and make voting a habit. Secretary of State Shirley N. Weber Ph.D. and Superintendent of Public Instruction Tony Thurmond invite high school and middle school students, teachers, and principals to participate in the California Student Mock Election every two years. High School Voter Education Weeks The California Education Code designates the last two full weeks in April and September as High School Voter Education Weeks. During these weeks, high schools and students work with county elections officials to promote civic education and participation on campus, encouraging lifelong voters and active citizens. Poll Worker Information Before every statewide election, thousands of Californians volunteer as poll workers to ensure that Election Day runs smoothly. Poll workers are provided training by county elections officials and paid a stipend for their services. Promote the Vote California Promote the Vote California focuses on advocating for a strong civic culture in California through partnerships with businesses and organizations for a more inclusive California. Be a Student Poll Worker Starting from the age of 16, high school students who are U.S. citizens, maintain a 2.5-grade point average, and have consent from their parent or guardian and the school are eligible to learn about election processes firsthand. They can earn between $65 and $180 by working as student poll workers on Election Day. Students Vote Project Students Vote Project (SVP) is a nonpartisan program established in 2016. It aims to elevate college student voices, promote civic engagement, and empower students to participate in the democratic process statewide. SVP hosted three quarterly meetings (March, July, October) including SVP program updates, a civic engagement outreach training, an action plan workshop, and spotlight speakers from universities, colleges, counties, and nonpartisan organizations. The California University and College Ballot Bowl is a friendly competition where higher education campuses compete to register the most students to vote and showcase civic engagement efforts. The Ballot Bowl occurs only during an even numbered year ahead of the general election. Student Voter Registration The Student Voter Registration program was created to ensure every school in California provides eligible students with a meaningful opportunity to register, or pre-register, to vote. The Secretary of State's office contacts schools annually to gather contact information as required by Elections Code and to provide voter registration cards when requested. Voter's Choice Act Ambassador Program The Secretary of State’s Voter’s Choice Act Ambassador Program aims to raise awareness about voting options and enhance voter education. Ambassadors work with various groups to address voter participation gaps as non-partisan trusted messengers. Election Video Resources For election-related video resources on topics such as Where's My Ballot?, Election Security in California, and Vote By Mail, please visit Election Video Resources. Publications and Resources For elections-related publications such as the Official Voter Information Guide, Reports of Registration, Statewide Election Results, and other voter education materials, please visit Publications and Resources. Frequently Asked Questions If you have any questions such as how to change your political party, if you need a California driver license or California identification card to apply online, or what to do if you have just moved within California, visit Frequently Asked Questions or contact the Secretary of State's Elections Division at (800) 345-VOTE (8683) or by email. Resources The below links include official communication to county elections officials, press releases from the Secretary of State, information about recalls, and current and proposed regulations. You can also find election data including voter registration and participation, and initiative history statistics. Advisories to County Elections Officials The California Secretary of State periodically provides written guidance and information to the state's county elections officials to help ensure a smooth electoral process. The written advisories -- known as CCROVs since they are directed to County Clerks & Registrars of Voters -- are posted here shortly after they are provided to county elections officials. Electronic copies of all CCROVs dating back to January 1, 2013, can be found here. News Releases For statements from the Secretary of State, media advisories, updates on when initiatives enter circulation, and more, please visit News Releases and Advisories. Elections Statistics Get historical voter registration participation in Primary and General elections, voter registration statistics, statewide and special election results, initiative history statistics and more. Ballot Measures Historical Information Find the history of statewide, county and municipal initiatives. County, City, School District and Ballot Measure Election Results and more. Recalls Article II of the California Constitution, approved by California voters in 1911, allows people to recall and remove elected officials and justices of the State Supreme Court from office. For more information about Recall Elections in California, please visit Recalls. Regulations Information about current and proposed regulations related to Elections, Business Programs, Political Reform, Registries, and Information Technology. Frequently Asked Questions If you have any questions such as how to change your political party, if you need a California driver license or California identification card to apply online, or what to do if you have just moved within California, visit Frequently Asked Questions or contact the Secretary of State's Elections Division at (800) 345-VOTE (8683) or by email. Election Information Congressional District 1, Special Primary Election - June 2, 2026Upcoming ElectionsPrior ElectionsAdvisories to County Elections Officials Committees and TaskforcesContact UsCounty Elections Officials Contact InformationCounty Elections MapFrequently Asked Questions Translated Election Information Información para nuevos votantes新選民資訊नए मतदाता के लिए जानकारी新しい投票者情報ព័ត៌មានសំរាប់អ្នកបោះឆ្នោតថ្មី새 유권자를 위한 정보Impormasyon Para sa Bagong Botanteข้อมูลสำหรับผู้ลงคะแนนเสียงรายใหม่Thông Tin cho Cử Tri MớiLanguage Requirements for Election MaterialsTranslated Publications Ballot Measures How to Qualify an InitiativeInitiative and Referendum Qualification StatusQualified Statewide Ballot MeasuresReferendumVoter Information Guides Candidate Information Political Parties2026 California Election GuideBallot Designations RegulationsCandidate StatementsCampaign FinanceQualifications for Running for Office in 2026Randomized Alphabet County Elections Officials Advisories to County Elections OfficialsPrior ElectionsCurrent and Proposed Regulations Election Security Election SecurityPost-Election AuditsVoting Technology
