SOURCE: https://www.cambridgema.gov/departments/citycouncil
============================================================
City Council Members There are nine members on the City Council, including the Mayor and Vice Mayor who serve a two-year term. Learn More Open Meeting Portal This portal shows all meetings of the City Council, including Committee meetings. Learn More Public Comment Sign Up Form Public comment is open to anyone wishing to speak to an item on the City Council agenda. Learn More Hearing Schedule Zoom Online Meeting Instructions Public Comment Instructions and Procedures (PDF) City Council Committee Assignments 2026-2027 Rules of the City Council City Organizational Chart Cambridge Municipal Code City Charter Zoning Ordinance View More The City Council, the policy setting arm of the City, derives its powers from the Cambridge Municipal Code (City Charter) and the laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The City Council authorizes public improvements and expenditures, adopts regulations and ordinances, establishes financial policies and performs many related legislative tasks. New Open Meeting Portal Deployment As part of our ongoing effort to improve transparency, accessibility, and public engagement, the City has transitioned to a new Agenda and Meeting Management system, OneMeeting. Starting on January 26, 2026, City Council, BZA and Planning Board meeting agendas, minutes, and video streaming will be available through this new portal. Other Boards and Commissions will follow at a date to be communicated later. Finding Your Meetings All scheduled public meetings including Council, Committees, BZA, Planning Board, and all Boards & Commissions can be found on the City Calendar via the "Public Meetings" icon. Historical meeting agenda and video can be found through the links below: From February 6, 2006 to May 3rd, 2021 Videos from June 10, 2019 to January 15, 2026 Useful Links For Public Comment: Public Comment Sign Up For meeting streaming via Zoom: Streaming / Comment via Zoom For Boards and Commissions members and vacancies (until further notice): Accela Meeting Portal If you have any questions, contact the City Clerk office at CityClerk@cambridgema.gov Virtual Meeting Attendance Members of the Public are invited to attend, watch, and/or participate in Regular and Special Meetings of the Cambridge City Council through the following 3 platforms: View on Cambridge Municipal Television Channel. Tune in to Cable Channel 22 locally to watch meetings on your television. Stream Live through the Open Meeting Portal. Navigate to the meeting you wish to view and click on "video" to begin the live stream. Watch/Participate Virtually through Zoom Teleconferencing. Just follow the appropriate link below: City Council Meetings To use Zoom via phone-only, dial a number based on your current location: US: 312-626-6799 or 929-436-2866 or 301-715-8592 or 346-248-7799 or 669-900-6833 or 253-215-8782 Webinar ID: 978 9584 7144 Committee Hearings To use Zoom via phone-only, dial a number based on your current location: US: 312-626-6799 or 929-436-2866 or 301-715-8592 or 346-248-7799 or 669-900-6833 or 253-215-8782 Webinar ID: 978 9584 7144 Registration is Required in Order to Speak during Public Comment Registration begins at 9 a.m. on the Friday before the meeting. Follow the link here for Public Comment to register to speak. Speakers will be prompted to enter their first and last name when signing into Zoom. Please use the same name you signed up to speak with in order to be unmuted by the moderator during public comment. For more information regarding Zoom technology, visit: https://www.cambridgema.gov/Departments/citycouncil/zoomonlinemeetinginstructions Upcoming City Council Meetings Mar 02 Mon Regular City Council Meeting 5:30 PM Regular City Council Meeting Mar 09 Mon Regular City Council Meeting 5:30 PM Regular City Council Meeting Mar 09 Mon City Council Public Hearing 6:30 PM City Council Public Hearing Mar 10 Tue The Finance Committee 10:00 AM The Finance Committee Mar 11 Wed The Human Services and Veterans Committee 11:00 AM The Human Services and Veterans Committee Mar 16 Mon Regular City Council meeting 5:30 PM Regular City Council meeting View All Tips and FAQs About the City Council The City Council, the policy setting arm of the City, derives its powers from the City charter and the laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. It authorizes public improvements and expenditures, adopts regulations and ordinances, levies taxes, controls the finances and property taxes of the City, and performs many related legislative tasks. The City Council is elected at-large by the proportional representation electoral process. Upon organization of each new Council, the members elect a Mayor and a Vice-Mayor, with the Mayor serving as the Council's chief legislative officer. The Council organizes into committees, which have become increasingly active over the past few years, providing much of the research and legislative analysis on major policy issues before the Council. The City Council meets regularly on Mondays at 5:30 p.m. from the first Monday in January to and including the last Monday in June, and from the second Monday in September to and including the last Monday in December in the Sullivan Chamber on the second floor of City Hall. Approximately one meeting each month is scheduled as an informal roundtable discussion meeting at which no votes are taken. Business meetings are televised live on 22-CityView, the Municipal Channel, and rebroadcast on Wednesday at 5:30 p.m. and Friday at 10 a.m. They are also live streamed on the Open Meeting Portal. The City Council's regular business meetings are conducted in accordance with the City Council Rules. The City Council meeting agenda is generally posted online by 5:30 p.m. on the Thursday before the meeting on the City Council Open Meeting Portal. Copies of the agenda are generally available between 10 a.m. and Noon on Fridays at the City Clerk's Office. Please note that City Hall closes at Noon on Fridays. Members of the public may speak at the public comment section of the scheduled business meeting for up to three minutes on any matter that is being considered by the City Council for action at that meeting (the public may not speak on items in the communications section of the agenda during public comment). You may sign up to speak by calling the City Council Office at 617-349-4280 on Mondays between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., or by signing up at the meeting between 5:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. To have an item placed on the City Council agenda for action at the meeting, contact a City Councillor to request that he or she submit an order or resolution to the City Clerk to be placed on the agenda. If you wish to submit written comments for a meeting, please read the instructions for submitting written comments. The agenda is also the way to send a letter to the City Council that will become part of the formal record of City Council proceedings. The letter should be addressed to the City Council, care of the City Clerk. The City Clerk will place all new communications on the agenda for the next regular City Council business meeting. Such letters, if they are about issues that are not otherwise on the Council's business agenda, are not considered part of the action agenda for that meeting, and thus, public comment on these communications is out of order. Value Statement and Goals On May 6, 2024, the City Council adopted the following Value Statement and Goals. Value Statement The Cambridge City Council is committed to developing policies that are reflective of the shared values of our community, recognizing the diversity of our city- including but not limited to race, sexual orientation, language, nationality, income, age, and ability. We will conduct our deliberations with transparency, community engagement, and consideration of the financial and social implications on our residents, visitors, nonprofits, and businesses. City Council Goals Housing and Zoning: Address the housing crisis by making it easier to build more housing of all types with a focus on affordability and protections for low, middle-income, elderly, and disabled residents. Economic Opportunity and Equity: Ensure the City of Cambridge offers economic opportunities to all residents and businesses and is taking steps toward greater economic equity, especially among our marginalized communities. Transportation: Improve the safety, efficiency, access, and sustainability of transportation options for all, and advocate for key transit priorities with the MBTA and other state and regional partners. Sustainability and Climate Resilience: Deepen the City of Cambridge’s commitment to addressing the climate crisis through the use of sustainable energy and strengthening climate resilience and supporting our residents and businesses through this transition. Government and Council Performance: The City Council is committed to effective decision making through close collaboration with each other and the City administration, to communicate transparently and to deepen accountability and engagement with the community. The City Council intends to work closely with the City Manager and staff to streamline priorities, establish metrics to track performance, and allocate staffing and financial resources. City Council Meeting Final Actions City Council Final Actions from January, 2016 to present can be viewed through the Open Meeting Portal. City Council Members There are nine members on the City Council, including the Mayor and Vice Mayor who serve a two-year term. Learn More Open Meeting Portal This portal shows all meetings of the City Council, including Committee meetings. Learn More Public Comment Sign Up Form Public comment is open to anyone wishing to speak to an item on the City Council agenda. Learn More Hearing Schedule Zoom Online Meeting Instructions Public Comment Instruct