SOURCE: https://www.cambridgema.gov/departments/mayorsoffice
============================================================
Housing Assistance Learn more about affordable housing, housing rights or disputes, financial assistance, emergency housing and more. Learn More Community Engagement Mayor Simmons is committed to fostering a vibrant and inclusive community by actively promoting engagement and collaboration among all residents. Learn More Support for Seniors Working to promote and safeguard the health and independence of Cambridge seniors over the age of 60. Learn More City Council Meetings Request Mayor to Speak at Event Request a Proclamation from the Mayor Employment Resources Request Use of Mayor's Parlor Interpretation Services Mayors Summer Youth Employment Program View More The mayor serves as the Chairperson for the City Council and as a member of the School Committee. As the official leader of the City, the Mayor fulfills political, ceremonial, and community leadership functions on behalf of the City and serves as the City's official receiver for visiting dignitaries and distinguished visitors. The Mayor’s Office has a diverse range of responsibilities that include supporting members of the public seeking information or seeking to address concerns regarding City government and municipal services. The Mayor’s Office also implements citywide public events and celebrations, conducts public policy research, drafts legislation, and serves as the City liaison between federal and state agencies, community groups, and citizens. Frequently-Asked Questions I am facing eviction. Who can help me? If you are facing eviction, your first step should be to consult a lawyer. Depending on your income, you may be able to secure a free lawyer. Contact either DeNovo at 617-661-1010 during business hours or Cambridge and Somerville Legal Services at 617-603-2713. Another resource includes Homeless and Eviction Prevention Services. How do I apply for Public Housing or get in touch with Cambridge Housing Authority? For more information about applying for Public Housing, contact the Cambridge Housing Authority 362 Green Street Cambridge, MA 02139 Phone: 617-864-3020 Telecommunications Device for the Deaf: 800-545-1833 x112 www.cambridge-housing.org For more general advice and assistance, contact: Cambridge Multi-Service Center 362 Green Street, 1st floor Cambridge, MA 02139 Phone: 617-349-6340 www.cambridgema.gov/MultiServiceCenter To learn about the City's Inclusionary Housing, how to apply, and for information about other affordable housing options in the Cambridge, please visit the City's Community Development Department Housing Division website: www.cambridgema.gov/CDD/housing What are some tips on Raising Healthy Children in Cambridge Here is the link to Raising Healthy Children in Cambridge Handbook, created by the Cambridge Healthy Children Task Force (HCTF). The HCTF is a community coalition made up of parents and professionals who work with children and families in Cambridge. The HCTF was organized in 1990 to promote the health of children in Cambridge. This booklet brings together the HCTF member’s expertise along with national guidelines and research. How can low-income individuals or families access legal services? The following Cambridge based organizations offer civil (non-criminal) legal aid to low-income individuals and families: Cambridge/Somerville (Greater Boston) Legal Services 60 Gore Street, Suite 203 Cambridge, MA 02141 617-603-2700 gbls.org De Novo (formerly Community Legal Services and Counseling Center) 47 Thorndike Street, SB-LL-1 Cambridge, MA 02141 617-661-1010 clsacc.org Harvard Legal Aid Bureau 23 Everett Street, 1st Floor, Cambridge, MA 02138 617-495-4408 harvardlegalaid.org What do I need to know about waste collection in Cambridge? The City provides weekly curbside pickup of household trash, recycling, and compost. Curbside collection is generally one day behind schedule following a holiday. Street cleaning makeup dates for holidays vary, so please check the Department of Public Works website for the latest information. Use the "Get Rid of it Right" tool on the Curbside Collections webpage to find your curbside collection and street cleaning schedule, search for how to dispose of items, schedule a mattress pick-up and more. Overview of Weekly Curbside Collection Recycling Compost Trash Collection Yard Waste (April 1 - December 31) Schedule a Curbside Pickup Clothing and Textiles TV, appliances, furniture, other bulky waste disposal Mattress Recycling Drop-Off Locations/Events Recycling Center Household Hazardous Waste Events Additional links The City’s "Get Rid of it Right" tool and free Zero Waste Cambridge app (iOS and Android) allow you to find your curbside collection and street cleaning schedule, report a missed pickup, search for how to dispose of items, schedule a mattress pick-up and more, Order supplies for curbside collection through the Compost, Recycle, and Trash Supplies Request Form Register here to receive news, tips, and updates about recycling and composting from Cambridge Recycling SeeClickFix helps residents reach the City online or via their smartphone to request services or get help fixing issues My trash and/or recycling was not picked up, what do I do? If your curbside collection was missed, please submit a report at CambridgeMA.gov/311 after 4 p.m. on your collection day. Typically, collection trucks go back for missed pickups after completing the current day’s route. Please leave the missed items at the curb to ensure collection. Learn more at Cambridgema.gov/curbsidecollections. Do Property Owners need to clear sidewalks of snow? Ice needs to be removed within 6 hours from the time it forms, per City Ordinance. Snow needs to be removed within 12 hours after snow stops falling during the day and before 1pm if it snowed during the night, per City Ordinance. Public Works and the Traffic Department work together to enforce this Ordinance. Parking Control Officers in the Traffic Department conduct enforcement on priority pedestrian routes throughout the winter, and Public Works Compliance Officers investigate all complaints received of uncleared sidewalks. The fine for failing to comply with the City’s sidewalk clearance ordinances is $50/day for each day of non-compliance. Even if you aren’t around, it is your responsibility to ensure someone clears sidewalks and ramps next to your property. We all have a shared responsibility for keeping our community safe and accessible during winter weather. For you, your neighbors, people with strollers or using wheelchairs, and the many people in Cambridge who walk, please do your part. How often does the city sweep the streets? Public Works mechanically sweeps each street in Cambridge once per month, April through December (weather permitting). Signs are posted on each residential street indicating the schedule. In order to ensure that streets are properly cleaned, cars must move off the side of the street being swept to avoid being ticketed. Citywide street sweeping includes twice yearly vacuum sweeping to improve stormwater quality. In addition to neighborhood sweeping, City squares are cleaned daily: on weekdays from 7 am to 3 pm, weekends and holidays from 4 am to 8 am (street sweeping) and 6 am to 10 am (hand-cleaning crew). Litter barrels in squares are emptied twice daily on weekdays and three times daily on weekends. The Division also has a power washer which is used to clean public trash and recycling receptacles, and to operate a graffiti removal program on both public and private property (with owner's permission). How do I pay for a parking ticket or dispute a parking ticket? A Parking ticket must be paid within 21 days of receiving it to avoid any additional fees. If you feel that the ticket was received in error, you may dispute the ticket. Options for paying a parking ticket: Pay by Web: Pay by Phone: 617 491-7277 Pay by Mail: P. O. Box 399113, Cambridge, MA 02139 Pay in Person: 344 Broadway Monday 8:30am - 8:00pm Tuesday - Thursday, 8:30am - 5:00pm Friday 8:30am - Noon Forms of Payment Accepted MC/Visa accepted. Cash, credit card or money order accepted for booted vehicles. Cash, credit card or money order accepted for immediate clearance at the Registry of Motor Vehicles. If you pay by check, there is a 30 day waiting period before clearance. Disputing a parking ticket: Fill out the Parking Ticket Dispute form and submit either online, by mail or in person. You will need the ticket number and plate number when filling out the form. Completed forms can be mailed or delivered to: Traffic, Parking & Transportation City of Cambridge 344 Broadway Cambridge, MA 02139 Attn: Hearing Officer You will receive a communication regarding the disposition of the dispute. If you feel the decision is not correct you may request a hearing. How do I get a parking permit or a visitors parking permit? Resident’s car A resident parking permit is required to park on most residential streets in Cambridge Monday through Saturday. The resident parking permit program was created to ease parking problems in residential areas by making it illegal for non-resident commuters to park on residential streets. Visitors Each residential household can obtain one visitor parking permit good in the area in which they live whether or not that household has a car. If you own multiple Cambridge properties, you must declare one as your primary residence. Only one visitor permit will be issued in your name. Consideration If you are having an event with multiple visitors you can submit a request for consideration to prevent your visitors from receiving a ticket. Eligibility requirements To purchase a resident parking permit you must: 1. Submit proof of residency as a Cambridge resident. 2. Have your car registered in your name at your Cambridge address 3. Principally garaged at your Cambridge address. 4. Pay all outstanding parking tickets 