SOURCE: https://www.cambridgema.gov/
============================================================
Learn More Human Service Programs Summer Lottery Applications Now Open Learn More Pay a Bill Online Public Meetings Report an Issue Online Library Hours & Locations View Property Database Pay Parking Tickets Access Online Services Online Permitting Curbside Collections Apply for a Job View More Subscribe to Daily Updates Get daily updates on Cambridge news and information. Sign up now! View the City's privacy statement News Winter Resources for Unsheltered Residents Winter storms and extreme temperatures pose a severe risk to the safety and health of people remaining outdoors. If you see someone on the street and are concerned about them, please contact the FirstStep Street Outreach team at 617-592-6895 or Cambridge Police at 617-349-3300. Please call 911 if there’s a medical emergency. Cambridge Seeking Community Members for New Commission Vacancies: February-March 2026 The City of Cambridge is currently seeking to fill vacancies on the new Combined Sewer Overflow Control and Stormwater Management Advisory Committee, Fresh Pond Master Plan Advisory Board, and Peace Commission. Cambridge Preschool Program to Accept Additional Applications for 2026-2027 School Year through April 13 The Cambridge Office of Early Childhood is offering a spring enrollment period for the Cambridge Preschool Program (CPP) to support families with preschool-aged children who have recently moved to Cambridge or who missed the earlier application period for the 2026-2027 school year. Cambridge City Manager Signs Executive Order and Joins City Council and Metro Mayors Coalition in Standing Together to Protect Residents and Stand Against Illegal ICE Actions City of Cambridge leadership and elected officials stood together with colleagues in the Metro Mayors Coalition today to affirm their values as a coalition of regional municipal leaders and protect the rights of their residents. City Releases New Biking Report Showing Record Trips by Bike and Improving Safety in Cambridge The City of Cambridge has released the 2025 Biking in Cambridge Data Report summarizing how biking has changed across the city over the past two decades. Council on Aging Extends Programming at Russell Youth and Community Center In response to community feedback and participation, the Cambridge Council on Aging will continue to offer programming for Cambridge adults age 60 and older at the Russell Youth and Community Center, 680 Huron Ave. Older adults are also invited to enjoy the Center’s Common Area on Thursdays and Fridays from 9 a.m. - 12 p.m. Black History Month at the Library Library unveils programs and events to celebrate Black History Month City of Cambridge 2026 Scholarship Applications Now Being Accepted The annual Scholarship Fund, which is in its 34th year, provides financial assistance to college-bound high school seniors and other Cambridge residents who wish to pursue post-secondary education. The deadline is March 4, 2026. City Funds Acquisition of Future Affordable Housing Site The Cambridge Housing Authority (CHA), with financial support from the City of Cambridge Affordable Housing Trust (AHT), has successfully purchased 31-37 Mellen Street from Lesley University. The site will be developed into affordable housing designed for families. View All View Our Digital Publications Learn More Coming Up Mar 02 Mon Community Benefits Advisory Committee 3:30 PM The Community Benefits Advisory Committee (CBAC) will meet to advance its purpose to act on the Guiding Principles for Community Benefits Funding set forth in the Community Needs Assessment. Regular City Council Meeting 5:30 PM Regular City Council Meeting CANCELLED - Mid Cambridge NCDC meeting 6:00 PM Mid Cambridge Neighborhood Conservation District Commission Monthly Meeting Mar 03 Tue School Advisory Council Agenda 8:30 AM School Advisory Council Agenda Open Data Review Board Meeting March 2026 5:30 PM Regular meeting of the Open Data Review Board. Join us! School Committee Regular Meeting 6:00 PM School Committee Regular Meeting American Freedmen Commission Meeting 6:30 PM Virtual meeting of the American Freedman Commission Planning Board Meeting 6:30 PM City of Cambridge Planning Board Meeting Mar 04 Wed Board of License Commissioners’ Public Meeting 9:00 AM Wednesday, March 4, 2026 Board of Assessors Public Meeting 10:00 AM Board of Assessors Public Meeting Outreach & Visibility Working Group Meeting 6:00 PM Working group meeting for LGBTQ+ Commission Mar 02 Mon Community Benefits Advisory Committee 3:30 PM The Community Benefits Advisory Committee (CBAC) will meet to advance its purpose to act on the Guiding Principles for Community Benefits Funding set forth in the Community Needs Assessment. Regular City Council Meeting 5:30 PM Regular City Council Meeting CANCELLED - Mid Cambridge NCDC meeting 6:00 PM Mid Cambridge Neighborhood Conservation District Commission Monthly Meeting Mar 03 Tue School Advisory Council Agenda 8:30 AM School Advisory Council Agenda Open Data Review Board Meeting March 2026 5:30 PM Regular meeting of the Open Data Review Board. Join us! School Committee Regular Meeting 6:00 PM School Committee Regular Meeting American Freedmen Commission Meeting 6:30 PM Virtual meeting of the American Freedman Commission Mar 02 Mon Community Benefits Advisory Committee 3:30 PM The Community Benefits Advisory Committee (CBAC) will meet to advance its purpose to act on the Guiding Principles for Community Benefits Funding set forth in the Community Needs Assessment. Regular City Council Meeting 5:30 PM Regular City Council Meeting CANCELLED - Mid Cambridge NCDC meeting 6:00 PM Mid Cambridge Neighborhood Conservation District Commission Monthly Meeting View All Interactive Equity and Inclusion Dashboard Click to View Helpful Resources Career Center Join our team! The Cambridge Career Center provides you with all the resources and information you need to navigate our hiring process seamlessly. Learn More Reduce, Reuse, or Recycle. Get Rid of It Right Reducing and Reusing prevent environmental impact of making new items. Use the Get Rid of IT Right Tool to dispose of many items. Learn More Have Questions About Immigrant Rights? We are experiencing a time of great uncertainty for immigrants in our community. Whether you’re a U.S. citizen, a green card holder, a student on a visa, or undocumented, you have legal rights. Learn More Learn More Human Service Programs Summer Lottery Applications Now Open Learn More Pay a Bill Online Public Meetings Report an Issue Online Library Hours & Locations View Property Database Pay Parking Tickets Access Online Services Online Permitting Curbside Collections Apply for a Job View More Subscribe to Daily Updates Get daily updates on Cambridge news and information. Sign up now! View the City's privacy statement News Winter Resources for Unsheltered Residents Winter storms and extreme temperatures pose a severe risk to the safety and health of people remaining outdoors. If you see someone on the street and are concerned about them, please contact the FirstStep Street Outreach team at 617-592-6895 or Cambridge Police at 617-349-3300. Please call 911 if there’s a medical emergency. Cambridge Seeking Community Members for New Commission Vacancies: February-March 2026 The City of Cambridge is currently seeking to fill vacancies on the new Combined Sewer Overflow Control and Stormwater Management Advisory Committee, Fresh Pond Master Plan Advisory Board, and Peace Commission. Cambridge Preschool Program to Accept Additional Applications for 2026-2027 School Year through April 13 The Cambridge Office of Early Childhood is offering a spring enrollment period for the Cambridge Preschool Program (CPP) to support families with preschool-aged children who have recently moved to Cambridge or who missed the earlier application period for the 2026-2027 school year. Cambridge City Manager Signs Executive Order and Joins City Council and Metro Mayors Coalition in Standing Together to Protect Residents and Stand Against Illegal ICE Actions City of Cambridge leadership and elected officials stood together with colleagues in the Metro Mayors Coalition today to affirm their values as a coalition of regional municipal leaders and protect the rights of their residents. City Releases New Biking Report Showing Record Trips by Bike and Improving Safety in Cambridge The City of Cambridge has released the 2025 Biking in Cambridge Data Report summarizing how biking has changed across the city over the past two decades. Council on Aging Extends Programming at Russell Youth and Community Center In response to community feedback and participation, the Cambridge Council on Aging will continue to offer programming for Cambridge adults age 60 and older at the Russell Youth and Community Center, 680 Huron Ave. Older adults are also invited to enjoy the Center’s Common Area on Thursdays and Fridays from 9 a.m. - 12 p.m. Black History Month at the Library Library unveils programs and events to celebrate Black History Month City of Cambridge 2026 Scholarship Applications Now Being Accepted The annual Scholarship Fund, which is in its 34th year, provides financial assistance to college-bound high school seniors and other Cambridge residents who wish to pursue post-secondary education. The deadline is March 4, 2026. City Funds Acquisition of Future Affordable Housing Site The Cambridge Housing Authority (CHA), with financial support from the City of Cambridge Affordable Housing Trust (AHT), has successfully purchased 31-37 Mellen Street from Lesley University. The site will be developed into affordable housing designed for families. View All View Our Digital Publications Learn More Coming Up Mar 02 Mon Community Benefits Advisory Committee 3:30 PM The Community Benefits Advisory Committee (CBAC) will meet to advance its purpose to act on the Guiding Principles for Community Benefits Funding set forth in the Community Needs Assessment. Regular City Council Meeting 5:30 PM Regular City Council Meeting CANCELLED - Mid Cambridge NCDC meeting 6:00 PM Mid Cambridge Neighborhood Conservation District Commission Monthly Meeting Mar 03 Tue School Advisory Council Agenda 8:30 AM School Advisory Council Agenda Open Data Review Board Meeting March 2026 5:30 PM Regular meeting of the Open Data Review Board. Join us! School Committee Regular Meeting 6:00 PM School Committee Regular Meeting American Freedmen Commission Meeting 6:30 PM Virtual meeting of the American Freedman Commission Planning Board Meeting 6:30 PM City of Cambridge Planning Board Meeting Mar 04 Wed Board of License Commissioners’ Public Meeting 9:00 AM Wednesday, March 4, 2026 Board of Assessors Public Meeting 10:00 AM Board of Assessors Public Meeting Outreach & Visibility Working Group Meeting 6:00 PM Working group meeting for LGBTQ+ Commission Mar 02 Mon Community Benefits Advisory Committee 3:30 PM The Community Benefits Advisory Committee (CBAC) will meet to advance its purpose to act on the Guiding Principles for Community Benefits Funding set forth in the Community Needs Assessment. Regular City Council Meeting 5:30 PM Regular City Council Meeting CANCELLED - Mid Cambridge NCDC meeting 6:00 PM Mid Cambridge Neighborhood Conservation District Commission Monthly Meeting Mar 03 Tue School Advisory Council Agenda 8:30 AM School Advisory Council Agenda Open Data Review Board Meeting March 2026 5:30 PM Regular meeting of the Open Data Review Board. Join us! School Committee Regular Meeting 6:00 PM School Committee Regular Meeting American Freedmen Commission Meeting 6:30 PM Virtual meeting of the American Freedman Commission Mar 02 Mon Community Benefits Advisory Committee 3:30 PM The Community Benefits Advisory Committee (CBAC) will meet to advance its purpose to act on the Guiding Principles for Community Benefits Funding set forth in the Community Needs Assessment. Regular City Council Meeting 5:30 PM Regular City Council Meeting CANCELLED - Mid Cambridge NCDC meeting 6:00 PM Mid Cambridge Neighborhood Conservation District Commission Monthly Meeting View All Interactive Equity and Inclusion Dashboard Click to View Helpful Resources Career Center Join our team! The Cambridge Career Center provides you with all the resources and information you need to navigate our hiring process seamlessly. Learn More Reduce, Reuse, or Recycle. Get Rid of It Right Reducing and Reusing prevent environmental impact of making new items. Use the Get Rid of IT Right Tool to dispose of many items. Learn More Have Questions About Immigrant Rights? We are experiencing a time of great uncertainty for immigrants in our community. Whether you’re a U.S. citizen, a green card holder, a student on a visa, or undocumented, you have legal rights. Learn More Human Service Programs Summer Lottery Applications Now Open Learn More News Winter Resources for Unsheltered Residents Winter storms and extreme temperatures pose a severe risk to the safety and health of people remaining outdoors. If you see someone on the street and are concerned about them, please contact the FirstStep Street Outreach team at 617-592-6895 or Cambridge Police at 617-349-3300. Please call 911 if there’s a medical emergency. Cambridge Seeking Community Members for New Commission Vacancies: February-March 2026 The City of Cambridge is currently seeking to fill vacancies on the new Combined Sewer Overflow Control and Stormwater Management Advisory Committee, Fresh Pond Master Plan Advisory Board, and Peace Commission. Cambridge Preschool Program to Accept Additional Applications for 2026-2027 School Year through April 13 The Cambridge Office of Early Childhood is offering a spring enrollment period for the Cambridge Preschool Program (CPP) to support families with preschool-aged children who have recently moved to Cambridge or who missed the earlier application period for the 2026-2027 school year. Cambridge City Manager Signs Executive Order and Joins City Council and Metro Mayors Coalition in Standing Together to Protect Residents and Stand Against Illegal ICE Actions City of Cambridge leadership and elected officials stood together with colleagues in the Metro Mayors Coalition today to affirm their values as a coalition of regional municipal leaders and protect the rights of their residents. City Releases New Biking Report Showing Record Trips by Bike and Improving Safety in Cambridge The City of Cambridge has released the 2025 Biking in Cambridge Data Report summarizing how biking has changed across the city over the past two decades. Council on Aging Extends Programming at Russell Youth and Community Center In response to community feedback and participation, the Cambridge Council on Aging will continue to offer programming for Cambridge adults age 60 and older at the Russell Youth and Community Center, 680 Huron Ave. Older adults are also invited to enjoy the Center’s Common Area on Thursdays and Fridays from 9 a.m. - 12 p.m. Black History Month at the Library Library unveils programs and events to celebrate Black History Month City of Cambridge 2026 Scholarship Applications Now Being Accepted The annual Scholarship Fund, which is in its 34th year, provides financial assistance to college-bound high school seniors and other Cambridge residents who wish to pursue post-secondary education. The deadline is March 4, 2026. City Funds Acquisition of Future Affordable Housing Site The Cambridge Housing Authority (CHA), with financial support from the City of Cambridge Affordable Housing Trust (AHT), has successfully purchased 31-37 Mellen Street from Lesley University. The site will be developed into affordable housing designed for families. View All Interactive Equity and Inclusion Dashboard Click to View Join our team! The Cambridge Career Center provides you with all the resources and information you need to navigate our hiring process seamlessly. We are experiencing a time of great uncertainty for immigrants in our community. Whether you’re a U.S. citizen, a green card holder, a student on a visa, or undocumented, you have legal rights.
