SOURCE: https://www.cambridgema.gov/Departments/electioncommission
============================================================
Election Day Official Results - 11/14 Update Proposed Charter Ballot Question Review a summary of the proposal, an argument in favor of the proposed charter, an argument against the proposed charter, and the full charter details. Translated versions of the ballot question summary are also available. Learn More Learn how Cambridge Votes in Local Elections The City of Cambridge uses Proportional Representation (PR) for City Council and School Committee elections. Learn more about PR voting and try a practice ranked choice ballot. Learn More Maps and Polling Locations Wards, precincts, and districts have changed beginning in 2022 Learn More Annual City Census Voter Registration Early Voting & Voter Guide Election Results Campaign & Political Finance Maps & Polling Locations Cambridge Municipal Elections Meeting Agendas and Minutes View More News Election Commission Publishes Report on 2025 Municipal Election Preliminary Unofficial Results Discrepancy Findings & Refined Processes Election Commission Publishes Report on 2025 Municipal Election Preliminary Unofficial Results Discrepancy Findings & Refined Processes 2025 Municipal Election Official Results – November 14th Update 2025 Municipal Election Unofficial Results - November 7th Update Cambridge Municipal Election Preliminary Unofficial Results: November 4, 2025 Advance Removal and Depositing of Ballots for the Municipal Election, November 4, 2025 View All Upcoming Elections September 1, 2026 State Primary Voter Registration Deadline: August 22, 2026 In-person: The Election Commission office will be open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Saturday, August 22, 2026 Online registration must be submitted by 11:59 p.m. on August 22, 2026 By mail: must be postmarked by August 22, 2026 Vote by Mail Application Deadline: August 25, 2026 at 5 p.m. (received in office) In-Person Early Voting: August 22, 2026 - August 28, 2026 On Election Day, polls will be open from 7 a.m. until 8 p.m. November 3, 2026 State Election Voter Registration Deadline: October 24, 2026 In-person: The Election Commission office will be open from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Saturday, October 24, 2026 Online registration must be submitted by 11:59 p.m. on October 24, 2026 By mail: must be postmarked by October 24, 2026 Vote by Mail Application Deadline: October 27, 2026 at 5 p.m. (received in office) In-Person Early Voting: October 17, 2026 - October 30, 2026 On Election Day, polls will be open from 7 a.m. until 8 p.m. Election Worker Recruitment Work at the Polls on Election Day! The Election Commission accepts applications throughout the year from registered voters who are interested in working at the polls on Election Day. Election workers must: Be registered to vote in Massachusetts; Be available to work from 6:30 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.; Be able to read and write English and speak clearly. Dedication, efficiency, patience, and friendliness are assets. Election workers will receive: Compensation at an hourly rate depending on the position assigned on Election Day; Paid training; The opportunity to assist the citizens of Cambridge with a positive voting experience. To apply: Fill out the Election Worker Application and return it to the Cambridge Election Commission: In person or by mail: Cambridge Election Commission, 689 Massachusetts Ave Ste 1, Cambridge, MA 02139 By email: elections@cambridgema.gov By fax: 617-349-4366 Election Worker Positions: Warden: The Warden is the Chief Election Officer at the polling place with responsibility for supervising and monitoring the work of the other election officers. The Warden maintains order, prevents interference with the voting process, insures that all required materials are available, assists voters, and oversees the accurate completion of all election forms. Clerk: The Clerk keeps a record of all facts relating to the election proceedings and notes any unusual happenings during the conduct of the election. The Clerk assumes the responsibilities of the Warden in the Warden’s absence. Inspector: Inspectors perform election duties under the direction of the Warden/Clerk, including but not limited to, checking voters’ names at the Check-In and Check-Out Tables and handing ballots to voters. Election Worker Recruitment Session: Wednesday, July 11, 6:00 PM Citywide Senior Center, 806 Massachusetts Ave RSVP: Call 617-349-4361 or email elections@cambridgema.gov Election Worker Recruitment Session: Wednesday, July 11, 6:00 PM Citywide Senior Center, 806 Massachusetts Ave RSVP: Call 617-349-4361 or email elections@cambridgema.gov Election Commission/Board of Election Commissioner Information Election Commission The Election Commission consists of the Board of Election Commissioners, Executive Director and the office staff. The Board of Election Commissioners is a four-member board established by Chapter 239 of the Acts of 1921. The Election Commission is responsible for ensuring compliance with federal, state, and local election laws and the policies and guidelines established by the Board; staffing and operation of polling locations; and providing access to candidacy for those seeking elected office. The role of the Election Commission includes administration of Chapter 55 of the Massachusetts General Laws, which governs campaign and political finance reporting, and responsibility for implementing Chapters 2.117 and 2.118 of the Cambridge Municipal Code, known as the Ethics Ordinance. Commission Members: Ethridge A. King, Jr. Larry W. Ward Charles J. Marquardt Thomas J. Stohlman, Jr. Election Commissioners The Board of Election Commissioners, two Democrats and two Republicans, are appointed to staggered four-year terms by the City Manager from a list of candidates submitted by the City Committees of each party. The Board's responsibilities include certifying nomination papers & petitions, registering voters, administering election recounts and preserving the integrity of the database for the street and voting lists by personally verifying the existence or nonexistence of questionable addresses addresses within the City. In addition, prior to each election, approximately 260 additional election personnel are recruited, trained and supervised by the Board to staff each of the polling locations within the City. They work with the office staff to ensure that elections are managed in accordance with local, state and federal laws. Commission Members: Ethridge A. King (Chair) Polyxane S. Cobb Larry W. Ward Charles Marquardt Election Commission Staff: Daily operations of the Commission are conducted by full-time and part-time staff persons. During peak times they receive assistance with voter registration, census processing and signature certification from temporary employees. Over 60,000 voter records are actively maintained both in the computer database and in a cross-referenced card system, with several thousand changes of party, name, and address annually. Confirmation of each change to a voter's record is sent to the respective voter in accordance with statutory requirements. Election Commissioners The Board of Election Commissioners, two Democrats and two Republicans, are appointed to staggered four-year terms by the City Manager from a list of candidates submitted by the City Committees of each party. The Board's responsibilities include certifying nomination papers & petitions, registering voters, administering election recounts and preserving the integrity of the database for the street and voting lists by personally verifying the existence or nonexistence of questionable addresses addresses within the City. In addition, prior to each election, approximately 260 additional election personnel are recruited, trained and supervised by the Board to staff each of the polling locations within the City. They work with the office staff to ensure that elections are managed in accordance with local, state and federal laws. Commission Members: Ethridge A. King (Chair) Polyxane S. Cobb Larry W. Ward Charles Marquardt Election Commission Staff: Daily operations of the Commission are conducted by full-time and part-time staff persons. During peak times they receive assistance with voter registration, census processing and signature certification from temporary employees. Over 60,000 voter records are actively maintained both in the computer database and in a cross-referenced card system, with several thousand changes of party, name, and address annually. Confirmation of each change to a voter's record is sent to the respective voter in accordance with statutory requirements. Election Commissioners The Board of Election Commissioners, two Democrats and two Republicans, are appointed to staggered four-year terms by the City Manager from a list of candidates submitted by the City Committees of each party. The Board's responsibilities include certifying nomination papers & petitions, registering voters, administering election recounts and preserving the integrity of the database for the street and voting lists by personally verifying the existence or nonexistence of questionable addresses addresses within the City. In addition, prior to each election, approximately 260 additional election personnel are recruited, trained and supervised by the Board to staff each of the polling locations within the City. They work with the office staff to ensure that elections are managed in accordance with local, state and federal laws. Commission Members: Ethridge A. King (Chair) Polyxane S. Cobb Larry W. Ward Charles Marquardt Election Commission Staff: Daily operations of the Commission are conducted by full-time and part-time staff persons. During peak times they receive assistance with voter registration, census processing and signature certification from temporary employees. Over 60,000 voter records are actively maintained both in the computer database and in a cross-refe