SOURCE: https://bloomington.in.gov/planning
============================================================
Planning and Transportation Share: Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Email this Page Address 401 N Morton St Suite 130 Bloomington IN 47404 Phone 812-349-3423 Fax 812-349-3520 Email [email protected] Facebook Connect on Facebook Twitter Follow us on Twitter Page last updated on December 9, 2025 at 2:03 pm The City of Bloomington Planning & Transportation Department provides a continuity of City government services to support the community’s well-being by offering both remote and in-person services. When Conducting Business with Planning and Transportation:Call first - speak with staff as most inquires can be addressed over the phone. This includes payments, permits, and general questions.Email or use standard mail - permits, others forms and materials can easily and safely be emailed or mailed.Walk-in service is welcome, but please consider on-line and remote service options we offer.Exercise patience - our goal is to provide the best service.Permits and Information - access on-line permit applications and petition information at: https://bloomington.in.gov/planning/permits As Bloomington continues to evolve and change as a community, the City of Bloomington Planning and Transportation Department has a very important mission: To ensure that the elements that make Bloomington special are maintained and enhanced as new development and redevelopment occurs. In order to ensure that our community retains its unique qualities, it is important to proactively plan for the impacts of this future development.Accomplishing this task requires the Planning and Transportation Department's corps of professional staff to develop long-term plans which address important community issues such as the provision of adequate transportation infrastructure, the development of sidewalk, pathway, and trail networks, and the protection and enhancement of Bloomington's neighborhoods. In addition to developing these long-term plans, the Planning and Transportation Department must review both permits for construction, as well as development projects requiring public hearing approval. As part of this review, the Planning and Transportation Department strives to ensure that environmental features are protected, buildings exhibit high-quality architecture, and pleasing streetscapes are created.Most of all, our department works hard to review development projects and create long-term plans in order to protect and enhance Bloomington's great quality of life.The Planning and Transportation Department is organized into two divisions: Development Services and Planning Services. Development Services provides expertise on zoning and land use questions, reviews development petitions, administers and issues permits, enforces zoning ordinances, and provides policy direction related to environmental protection. Planning Services provides expertise on long-range planning studies and sub-area planning studies for land use and transportation policy, collects, and analyzes and disseminates data.. The Planning and Transportation Department provides support to numerous boards and commissions linked at https://bloomington.in.gov/planning/boards. More specific information on Department projects, programs, and services is provided at the links below. If you have any questions, please contact the Planning and Transportation Department at (812) 349-3423, or send an E-mail to [email protected]. Permits and information from the Planning and Transportation Department. Meeting Schedule and Project Deadlines (DRC brochure) for hearing dates and deadlines for the Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, Hearing Officer, and Plat Committee. The UDO governs land use and development throughout the City of Bloomington planning jurisdiction. Plans and Studies of the Planning and Transportation department Information on the comprehensive plan for the City of Bloomington. Boards and Commissions staffed by the Planning and Transportation department Properties that meet the minimum contiguity requirements set forth at IC 36-4-3-1.5 have been identified and mapped (link). These properties offer a means to consider extending the City's boundaries and services to help plan for appropriate urban growth. Interested parties should contact the City's Utilities Department at 812-349-3650 to review the feasibility of sanitary sewer extensions to the mapped properties. If the extension is feasible, interested parties will need to coordinate with the City on the steps necessary for voluntary annexation The BMCMPO is the Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) that serves the City of Bloomington, the Town of Ellettsville, parts of Monroe County and local transit agencies. Information on City Traffic Calming and Neighborhood Greenways City of Bloomington's Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Resource, your one-stop-shop for information on building an ADU in Bloomington! ADUs are small, self-contained residential units built on the same lot as an existing home. They can provide affordable housing options, additional rental income, and more. A repository of all documents, plans, and studies of the department of Planning and Transportation Resources for Bloomington's Safe Routes to School Program B-Clear/Open Data Portal Traffic Data Getting Around Bloomington City Maps Bid/Quotes-Planning & Transportation Common Council David Brantez Title Zoning Planner and GIS Analyst Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Joy Brown Title Zoning Compliance Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Jennifer Burrell Title Senior Zoning Compliance Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Anne Crecelius Title Long-Range Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Hank Duncan Title Safe Streets Program Manager Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 LeAnna Faubion Title Administrative Assistant Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Katie Gandhi Title MPO Transportation Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Eric Greulich Title Development Services Manager Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Melissa Hirtzel Title Office Manager Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 David Hittle Title Director Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Gabriel Holbrow Title Zoning Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Cole Jackson Title Long Range Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Rachael Johnson Title Senior Environmental Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Jamie Kreindler Title Senior Zoning Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Ava Lowe Title Public Engagement and Data Analysis Fellow Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Pat Martin Title MPO Director Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Joe Patterson Title Zoning & Long Range Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Ryan Robling Title Planning Services Manager Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Jacqueline Scanlan Title Assistant Director Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Page last updated on December 9, 2025 at 2:03 pm The City of Bloomington Planning & Transportation Department provides a continuity of City government services to support the community’s well-being by offering both remote and in-person services. When Conducting Business with Planning and Transportation:Call first - speak with staff as most inquires can be addressed over the phone. This includes payments, permits, and general questions.Email or use standard mail - permits, others forms and materials can easily and safely be emailed or mailed.Walk-in service is welcome, but please consider on-line and remote service options we offer.Exercise patience - our goal is to provide the best service.Permits and Information - access on-line permit applications and petition information at: https://bloomington.in.gov/planning/permits As Bloomington continues to evolve and change as a community, the City of Bloomington Planning and Transportation Department has a very important mission: To ensure that the elements that make Bloomington special are maintained and enhanced as new development and redevelopment occurs. In order to ensure that our community retains its unique qualities, it is important to proactively plan for the impacts of this future development.Accomplishing this task requires the Planning and Transportation Department's corps of professional staff to develop long-term plans which address important community issues such as the provision of adequate transportation infrastructure, the development of sidewalk, pathway, and trail networks, and the protection and enhancement of Bloomington's neighborhoods. In addition to developing these long-term plans, the Planning and Transportation Department must review both permits for construction, as well as development projects requiring public hearing approval. As part of this review, the Planning and Transportation Department strives to ensure that environmental features are protected, buildings exhibit high-quality architecture, and pleasing streetscapes are created.Most of all, our department works hard to review development projects and create long-term plans in order to protect and enhance Bloomington's great quality of life.The Planning and Transportation Department is organized into two divisions: Development Services and Planning Services. Development Services provides expertise on zoning and land use questions, reviews development petitions, administers and issues permits, enforces zoning ordinances, and provides policy direction related to environmental protection. Planning Services provides expertise on long-range planning studies and sub-area planning studies for land use and transportation policy, collects, and analyzes and disseminates data.. The Planning and Transportation Department provides support to numerous boards and commissions linked at https://bloomington.in.gov/planning/boards. More specific information on Department projects, programs, and services is provided at the links below. If you have any questions, please contact the Planning and Transportation Department at (812) 349-3423, or send an E-mail to [email protected]. Permits and information from the Planning and Transportation Department. Meeting Schedule and Project Deadlines (DRC brochure) for hearing dates and deadlines for the Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, Hearing Officer, and Plat Committee. The UDO governs land use and development throughout the City of Bloomington planning jurisdiction. Plans and Studies of the Planning and Transportation department Information on the comprehensive plan for the City of Bloomington. Boards and Commissions staffed by the Planning and Transportation department Properties that meet the minimum contiguity requirements set forth at IC 36-4-3-1.5 have been identified and mapped (link). These properties offer a means to consider extending the City's boundaries and services to help plan for appropriate urban growth. Interested parties should contact the City's Utilities Department at 812-349-3650 to review the feasibility of sanitary sewer extensions to the mapped properties. If the extension is feasible, interested parties will need to coordinate with the City on the steps necessary for voluntary annexation The BMCMPO is the Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) that serves the City of Bloomington, the Town of Ellettsville, parts of Monroe County and local transit agencies. Information on City Traffic Calming and Neighborhood Greenways City of Bloomington's Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Resource, your one-stop-shop for information on building an ADU in Bloomington! ADUs are small, self-contained residential units built on the same lot as an existing home. They can provide affordable housing options, additional rental income, and more. A repository of all documents, plans, and studies of the department of Planning and Transportation Resources for Bloomington's Safe Routes to School Program B-Clear/Open Data Portal Traffic Data Getting Around Bloomington City Maps Bid/Quotes-Planning & Transportation Common Council David Brantez Title Zoning Planner and GIS Analyst Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Joy Brown Title Zoning Compliance Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Jennifer Burrell Title Senior Zoning Compliance Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Anne Crecelius Title Long-Range Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Hank Duncan Title Safe Streets Program Manager Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 LeAnna Faubion Title Administrative Assistant Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Katie Gandhi Title MPO Transportation Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Eric Greulich Title Development Services Manager Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Melissa Hirtzel Title Office Manager Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 David Hittle Title Director Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Gabriel Holbrow Title Zoning Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Cole Jackson Title Long Range Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Rachael Johnson Title Senior Environmental Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Jamie Kreindler Title Senior Zoning Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Ava Lowe Title Public Engagement and Data Analysis Fellow Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Pat Martin Title MPO Director Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Joe Patterson Title Zoning & Long Range Planner Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Ryan Robling Title Planning Services Manager Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Jacqueline Scanlan Title Assistant Director Email [email protected] Phone 812-349-3423 Page last updated on December 9, 2025 at 2:03 pm The City of Bloomington Planning & Transportation Department provides a continuity of City government services to support the community’s well-being by offering both remote and in-person services. When Conducting Business with Planning and Transportation:Call first - speak with staff as most inquires can be addressed over the phone. This includes payments, permits, and general questions.Email or use standard mail - permits, others forms and materials can easily and safely be emailed or mailed.Walk-in service is welcome, but please consider on-line and remote service options we offer.Exercise patience - our goal is to provide the best service.Permits and Information - access on-line permit applications and petition information at: https://bloomington.in.gov/planning/permits As Bloomington continues to evolve and change as a community, the City of Bloomington Planning and Transportation Department has a very important mission: To ensure that the elements that make Bloomington special are maintained and enhanced as new development and redevelopment occurs. In order to ensure that our community retains its unique qualities, it is important to proactively plan for the impacts of this future development.Accomplishing this task requires the Planning and Transportation Department's corps of professional staff to develop long-term plans which address important community issues such as the provision of adequate transportation infrastructure, the development of sidewalk, pathway, and trail networks, and the protection and enhancement of Bloomington's neighborhoods. In addition to developing these long-term plans, the Planning and Transportation Department must review both permits for construction, as well as development projects requiring public hearing approval. As part of this review, the Planning and Transportation Department strives to ensure that environmental features are protected, buildings exhibit high-quality architecture, and pleasing streetscapes are created.Most of all, our department works hard to review development projects and create long-term plans in order to protect and enhance Bloomington's great quality of life.The Planning and Transportation Department is organized into two divisions: Development Services and Planning Services. Development Services provides expertise on zoning and land use questions, reviews development petitions, administers and issues permits, enforces zoning ordinances, and provides policy direction related to environmental protection. Planning Services provides expertise on long-range planning studies and sub-area planning studies for land use and transportation policy, collects, and analyzes and disseminates data.. The Planning and Transportation Department provides support to numerous boards and commissions linked at https://bloomington.in.gov/planning/boards. More specific information on Department projects, programs, and services is provided at the links below. If you have any questions, please contact the Planning and Transportation Department at (812) 349-3423, or send an E-mail to [email protected]. Permits and information from the Planning and Transportation Department. Meeting Schedule and Project Deadlines (DRC brochure) for hearing dates and deadlines for the Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, Hearing Officer, and Plat Committee. The UDO governs land use and development throughout the City of Bloomington planning jurisdiction. Plans and Studies of the Planning and Transportation department Information on the comprehensive plan for the City of Bloomington. Boards and Commissions staffed by the Planning and Transportation department Properties that meet the minimum contiguity requirements set forth at IC 36-4-3-1.5 have been identified and mapped (link). These properties offer a means to consider extending the City's boundaries and services to help plan for appropriate urban growth. Interested parties should contact the City's Utilities Department at 812-349-3650 to review the feasibility of sanitary sewer extensions to the mapped properties. If the extension is feasible, interested parties will need to coordinate with the City on the steps necessary for voluntary annexation The BMCMPO is the Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) that serves the City of Bloomington, the Town of Ellettsville, parts of Monroe County and local transit agencies. Information on City Traffic Calming and Neighborhood Greenways City of Bloomington's Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Resource, your one-stop-shop for information on building an ADU in Bloomington! ADUs are small, self-contained residential units built on the same lot as an existing home. They can provide affordable housing options, additional rental income, and more. A repository of all documents, plans, and studies of the department of Planning and Transportation Resources for Bloomington's Safe Routes to School Program B-Clear/Open Data Portal Traffic Data Getting Around Bloomington City Maps Bid/Quotes-Planning & Transportation Common Council Permits and information from the Planning and Transportation Department. Meeting Schedule and Project Deadlines (DRC brochure) for hearing dates and deadlines for the Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, Hearing Officer, and Plat Committee. The UDO governs land use and development throughout the City of Bloomington planning jurisdiction. Plans and Studies of the Planning and Transportation department Information on the comprehensive plan for the City of Bloomington. Boards and Commissions staffed by the Planning and Transportation department Properties that meet the minimum contiguity requirements set forth at IC 36-4-3-1.5 have been identified and mapped (link). These properties offer a means to consider extending the City's boundaries and services to help plan for appropriate urban growth. Interested parties should contact the City's Utilities Department at 812-349-3650 to review the feasibility of sanitary sewer extensions to the mapped properties. If the extension is feasible, interested parties will need to coordinate with the City on the steps necessary for voluntary annexation The BMCMPO is the Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) that serves the City of Bloomington, the Town of Ellettsville, parts of Monroe County and local transit agencies. Information on City Traffic Calming and Neighborhood Greenways City of Bloomington's Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Resource, your one-stop-shop for information on building an ADU in Bloomington! ADUs are small, self-contained residential units built on the same lot as an existing home. They can provide affordable housing options, additional rental income, and more. A repository of all documents, plans, and studies of the department of Planning and Transportation Resources for Bloomington's Safe Routes to School Program
