SOURCE: https://bloomington.in.gov/mayor
============================================================
Mayor Kerry Thomson Share: Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Email this Page Address 401 N Morton St Suite 210 Bloomington IN 47404 Phone 812-349-3406 Fax 812-349-3455 Facebook Connect on Facebook Twitter Follow us on Twitter Page last updated on November 15, 2024 at 1:39 pm After spending her career working to build better communities, Kerry Thomson became Bloomington’s 33rd Mayor on January 1, 2024, to bring progress, change, and a new approach to city hall. An experienced nonprofit executive who has managed large organizations, complex projects, and multi-million-dollar budgets, Thomson has a proven record of bringing people together to get things done. A former CEO of Habitat for Humanity of Monroe County, she took over an organization in debt and built it into a sophisticated operation, creating unprecedented growth, a $6 million mortgage portfolio, and hundreds of thousands of dollars in investments that resulted in building homes for more than 400 people. Following 20 years of service with Habitat, Kerry became the Executive Director of Indiana University’s Center for Rural Engagement in 2018. In that role, she led efforts to create results-driven initiatives that improve the quality of life and economic vitality of rural communities. In her time at the Center, she expanded its reach into 50 counties, impacting 20,000 Hoosiers through 300 different projects. As Mayor, Thomson is focused on using her expertise to address some of the city’s long-neglected problems. Her priorities include addressing the lack of affordable housing, tackling the drug and mental health crisis plaguing downtown, better assisting our unhoused neighbors, creating a more inclusive, accessible, and responsive government, and ending the political infighting and finger-pointing that has stalled the progress Bloomington desperately needs. An avid cyclist, who can often be seen biking to work and events throughout the community, Thomson has served on the boards at Indiana University Credit Union, Indiana Habitat for Humanity, Habitat for Humanity International’s US Council, and the Tithe Advisory Board. A graduate of Randolph Macon Women’s College, she is married to an IU physics professor, and along with their four children, lives in the Elm Heights neighborhood. Contact Mayor Thomson with a question, comment, or concern. [email protected] or Mayor Kerry Thomson City of Bloomington–Office of the Mayor 401 North Morton Street, Suite 210 Bloomington, Indiana 47404 Throughout the year, Mayor Thomson recognizes individuals and organizations by issuing a City of Bloomington proclamation in their honor. Proclamations can designate a specific date, week or month of recognition. Residents may use the uReport website to report any non-emergency hazards around town. Department: Office Of The Mayor Page last updated on November 15, 2024 at 1:39 pm After spending her career working to build better communities, Kerry Thomson became Bloomington’s 33rd Mayor on January 1, 2024, to bring progress, change, and a new approach to city hall. An experienced nonprofit executive who has managed large organizations, complex projects, and multi-million-dollar budgets, Thomson has a proven record of bringing people together to get things done. A former CEO of Habitat for Humanity of Monroe County, she took over an organization in debt and built it into a sophisticated operation, creating unprecedented growth, a $6 million mortgage portfolio, and hundreds of thousands of dollars in investments that resulted in building homes for more than 400 people. Following 20 years of service with Habitat, Kerry became the Executive Director of Indiana University’s Center for Rural Engagement in 2018. In that role, she led efforts to create results-driven initiatives that improve the quality of life and economic vitality of rural communities. In her time at the Center, she expanded its reach into 50 counties, impacting 20,000 Hoosiers through 300 different projects. As Mayor, Thomson is focused on using her expertise to address some of the city’s long-neglected problems. Her priorities include addressing the lack of affordable housing, tackling the drug and mental health crisis plaguing downtown, better assisting our unhoused neighbors, creating a more inclusive, accessible, and responsive government, and ending the political infighting and finger-pointing that has stalled the progress Bloomington desperately needs. An avid cyclist, who can often be seen biking to work and events throughout the community, Thomson has served on the boards at Indiana University Credit Union, Indiana Habitat for Humanity, Habitat for Humanity International’s US Council, and the Tithe Advisory Board. A graduate of Randolph Macon Women’s College, she is married to an IU physics professor, and along with their four children, lives in the Elm Heights neighborhood. Contact Mayor Thomson with a question, comment, or concern. [email protected] or Mayor Kerry Thomson City of Bloomington–Office of the Mayor 401 North Morton Street, Suite 210 Bloomington, Indiana 47404 Throughout the year, Mayor Thomson recognizes individuals and organizations by issuing a City of Bloomington proclamation in their honor. Proclamations can designate a specific date, week or month of recognition. Residents may use the uReport website to report any non-emergency hazards around town. Department: Office Of The Mayor Page last updated on November 15, 2024 at 1:39 pm After spending her career working to build better communities, Kerry Thomson became Bloomington’s 33rd Mayor on January 1, 2024, to bring progress, change, and a new approach to city hall. An experienced nonprofit executive who has managed large organizations, complex projects, and multi-million-dollar budgets, Thomson has a proven record of bringing people together to get things done. A former CEO of Habitat for Humanity of Monroe County, she took over an organization in debt and built it into a sophisticated operation, creating unprecedented growth, a $6 million mortgage portfolio, and hundreds of thousands of dollars in investments that resulted in building homes for more than 400 people. Following 20 years of service with Habitat, Kerry became the Executive Director of Indiana University’s Center for Rural Engagement in 2018. In that role, she led efforts to create results-driven initiatives that improve the quality of life and economic vitality of rural communities. In her time at the Center, she expanded its reach into 50 counties, impacting 20,000 Hoosiers through 300 different projects. As Mayor, Thomson is focused on using her expertise to address some of the city’s long-neglected problems. Her priorities include addressing the lack of affordable housing, tackling the drug and mental health crisis plaguing downtown, better assisting our unhoused neighbors, creating a more inclusive, accessible, and responsive government, and ending the political infighting and finger-pointing that has stalled the progress Bloomington desperately needs. An avid cyclist, who can often be seen biking to work and events throughout the community, Thomson has served on the boards at Indiana University Credit Union, Indiana Habitat for Humanity, Habitat for Humanity International’s US Council, and the Tithe Advisory Board. A graduate of Randolph Macon Women’s College, she is married to an IU physics professor, and along with their four children, lives in the Elm Heights neighborhood. Contact Mayor Thomson with a question, comment, or concern. [email protected] or Mayor Kerry Thomson City of Bloomington–Office of the Mayor 401 North Morton Street, Suite 210 Bloomington, Indiana 47404 Throughout the year, Mayor Thomson recognizes individuals and organizations by issuing a City of Bloomington proclamation in their honor. Proclamations can designate a specific date, week or month of recognition. Residents may use the uReport website to report any non-emergency hazards around town. Department: Office Of The Mayor Throughout the year, Mayor Thomson recognizes individuals and organizations by issuing a City of Bloomington proclamation in their honor. Proclamations can designate a specific date, week or month of recognition. Residents may use the uReport website to report any non-emergency hazards around town.
