SOURCE: https://www.acgov.org
============================================================
Disclaimer Translation of pages on ACGOV.org is performed by Google Translate, a third-party service which Alameda County has no control over. The service provides automated computer translations that are only an approximation of the websites’ original content. Alameda County does not warrant the accuracy, reliability, or timeliness of any information translated by Google Translate. These translations should not be considered exact renderings of the original ACGOV.org site. Some portions of the site will not be translated at all, which includes but is not limited to buttons, graphics, photos, and video content.  Services  Careers  Connect  Participate SURVEY We'd Love Your Feedback on Digital Accessibility We're working to make our website more accessible for everyone. To help us better understand how people with disabilities access our site— including which browsers, devices, and assistive technologies you use — we invite you to take a short survey. Take Our Accessibility Survey ELECTIONS Special Election Results Available The November 4, 2025 Statewide Special Election results are now available. Click here for the results RECOGNITION 2025 Digital Counties Survey Award Alameda County is proud to be recognized again by the Center for Digital Government as the top digital county among counties with over 1 million residents. This is the 2nd year-in-a-row we have won. The Digital Counties Survey identifies the best technology practices among U.S. counties, including initiatives that streamline delivery of government services; provide data analytics to allow decisions based on performance and outcomes; enhance cybersecurity; and apply innovative and emerging technologies to county priorities. Read the CDG announcement and article. RECOGNITION 2025 NACo Achievement Awards We are proud to have been awarded eight 2025 NACo Achievement Awards. Since 1970, the NACo Achievement Awards have recognized outstanding county government programs and services. Through a non-competitive application process, noteworthy programs receive awards in 18 categories that cover a vast range of county responsibilities. Board Conversational AI Assistant CBS Maps Tracking Modernization E2Lite Application using Generative Coding Technology Election Communication for Military and Overseas Voters Election Worker W2 and Onboarding Process Healthy Schools and Communities Recipe for Health (R4H) Data Management & Optimization Youth Voting PRESS Press Releases View list of official press releases issued by the County. View Press Releases. FUTURE Vision 2036 ACGOV Vision 2036 is Alameda County's comprehensive effort to set a course for the next decade that embraces the rich culture and diversity of our County, anticipates community challenges, and maximizes our ability to meet residents' needs in a rapidly changing world. Here is how we see Alameda County in 2036. COMMUNITY ACGOV Cares Volunteer opportunities, employee stories, donation options and more. Read more. TOOLS Language Access Solutions Alameda County residents can communicate with and receive services from the County, regardless of the language they speak. View Language Access options. Board of Supervisors District 1 David Haubert President District 2 Elisa Márquez District 3 Lena Tam Vice President District 4 Nate Miley District 5 Nikki Fortunato Bas Quick Links Agencies & Departments Board of Supervisors Meetings / Broadcasts / Current Meeting Agenda Planning Department Meeting Broadcasts County Administrator's Office Elected Officials Programs & Initiatives Budget Portal Alameda County Public Records Portal   1221 Oak Street, Room 555 Oakland, CA 94612 510.272.6984  Links Department Website  Online Services Budget Documents   County Office 1221 Oak Street, Room 536 Oakland, CA 94612 510.272.6984  Links Board of Supervisors Website District 1 Website District 2 Website District 3 Website District 4 Website District 5 Website  Online Services Look Up Your District Watch Board Meetings X External Link You are about to leave an official Alameda County website. Alameda County bears no responsibility for the accuracy, legality, accessibility, or content of the external site or for that of subsequent links. Contact the external site for answers to questions regarding its content. Cancel Continue  Services  Careers  Connect  Participate SURVEY We'd Love Your Feedback on Digital Accessibility We're working to make our website more accessible for everyone. To help us better understand how people with disabilities access our site— including which browsers, devices, and assistive technologies you use — we invite you to take a short survey. Take Our Accessibility Survey ELECTIONS Special Election Results Available The November 4, 2025 Statewide Special Election results are now available. Click here for the results RECOGNITION 2025 Digital Counties Survey Award Alameda County is proud to be recognized again by the Center for Digital Government as the top digital county among counties with over 1 million residents. This is the 2nd year-in-a-row we have won. The Digital Counties Survey identifies the best technology practices among U.S. counties, including initiatives that streamline delivery of government services; provide data analytics to allow decisions based on performance and outcomes; enhance cybersecurity; and apply innovative and emerging technologies to county priorities. Read the CDG announcement and article. RECOGNITION 2025 NACo Achievement Awards We are proud to have been awarded eight 2025 NACo Achievement Awards. Since 1970, the NACo Achievement Awards have recognized outstanding county government programs and services. Through a non-competitive application process, noteworthy programs receive awards in 18 categories that cover a vast range of county responsibilities. Board Conversational AI Assistant CBS Maps Tracking Modernization E2Lite Application using Generative Coding Technology Election Communication for Military and Overseas Voters Election Worker W2 and Onboarding Process Healthy Schools and Communities Recipe for Health (R4H) Data Management & Optimization Youth Voting PRESS Press Releases View list of official press releases issued by the County. View Press Releases. FUTURE Vision 2036 ACGOV Vision 2036 is Alameda County's comprehensive effort to set a course for the next decade that embraces the rich culture and diversity of our County, anticipates community challenges, and maximizes our ability to meet residents' needs in a rapidly changing world. Here is how we see Alameda County in 2036. COMMUNITY ACGOV Cares Volunteer opportunities, employee stories, donation options and more. Read more. TOOLS Language Access Solutions Alameda County residents can communicate with and receive services from the County, regardless of the language they speak. View Language Access options. Board of Supervisors District 1 David Haubert President District 2 Elisa Márquez District 3 Lena Tam Vice President District 4 Nate Miley District 5 Nikki Fortunato Bas Quick Links Agencies & Departments Board of Supervisors Meetings / Broadcasts / Current Meeting Agenda Planning Department Meeting Broadcasts County Administrator's Office Elected Officials Programs & Initiatives Budget Portal Alameda County Public Records Portal   1221 Oak Street, Room 555 Oakland, CA 94612 510.272.6984  Links Department Website  Online Services Budget Documents   County Office 1221 Oak Street, Room 536 Oakland, CA 94612 510.272.6984  Links Board of Supervisors Website District 1 Website District 2 Website District 3 Website District 4 Website District 5 Website  Online Services Look Up Your District Watch Board Meetings SURVEY We'd Love Your Feedback on Digital Accessibility We're working to make our website more accessible for everyone. To help us better understand how people with disabilities access our site— including which browsers, devices, and assistive technologies you use — we invite you to take a short survey. Take Our Accessibility Survey ELECTIONS Special Election Results Available The November 4, 2025 Statewide Special Election results are now available. Click here for the results RECOGNITION 2025 Digital Counties Survey Award Alameda County is proud to be recognized again by the Center for Digital Government as the top digital county among counties with over 1 million residents. This is the 2nd year-in-a-row we have won. The Digital Counties Survey identifies the best technology practices among U.S. counties, including initiatives that streamline delivery of government services; provide data analytics to allow decisions based on performance and outcomes; enhance cybersecurity; and apply innovative and emerging technologies to county priorities. Read the CDG announcement and article. RECOGNITION 2025 NACo Achievement Awards We are proud to have been awarded eight 2025 NACo Achievement Awards. Since 1970, the NACo Achievement Awards have recognized outstanding county government programs and services. Through a non-competitive application process, noteworthy programs receive awards in 18 categories that cover a vast range of county responsibilities. Board Conversational AI Assistant CBS Maps Tracking Modernization E2Lite Application using Generative Coding Technology Election Communication for Military and Overseas Voters Election Worker W2 and Onboarding Process Healthy Schools and Communities Recipe for Health (R4H) Data Management & Optimization Youth Voting PRESS Press Releases View list of official press releases issued by the County. View Press Releases. FUTURE Vision 2036 ACGOV Vision 2036 is Alameda County's comprehensive effort to set a course for the next decade that embraces the rich culture and diversity of our County, anticipates community challenges, and maximizes our ability to meet residents' needs in a rapidly changing world. Here is how we see Alameda County in 2036. COMMUNITY ACGOV Cares Volunteer opportunities, employee stories, donation options and more. Read more. TOOLS Language Access Solutions Alameda County residents can communicate with and receive services from the County, regardless of the language they speak. View Language Access options.
