SOURCE: https://www.portland.gov/
============================================================
Welcome to Portland, Oregon Popular searches federal government business tax charter, code, policies council agenda employee portal find a park jobs recreation class or activity sewer and water bill sanctuary city Apply or file jobs, licenses, financial assistance Engage volunteer, advise, comment, testify, attend Permits construction, parking, trees, events and conditional use Pay bills, taxes, fees Report noise, water concerns, pollution, other complaints Find information, resources, data Find services and information by topic Access and ADA accommodations Biking City budget City planning City projects Community education and outreach Construction and development Economic development Environment Fire and life safety Fire and medical response Garbage and recycling Jobs and internships Open data, statistics, and maps Operating a business in Portland Parking Parks, recreation, and activities Police and safety Rent or own property Sidewalks Transportation and roads Trees Visiting Water, stormwater, and sewer Administrative and Council Leadership Keith Wilson Mayor Keith Wilson is the 54th Mayor of Portland, OR. He was elected in November 2024 and took office in January 2025. Raymond C. Lee III City Administrator Raymond C. Lee III is serving as the City Administrator of Portland, OR. He was appointed by Mayor Keith Wilson in December 2025. Simone Rede City Auditor Simone Rede is the City Auditor of Portland, OR. She was first elected in May 2022 and was re-elected in November 2024. Olivia Clark District 4 - Council Vice President Olivia Clark is the City Council Vice President. She was voted in as council vice president in January 2026. Jamie Dunphy District 1 - Council President Jamie Dunphy is the City Council President. He was voted in as council president in January 2026. City Council Members District 1 Powellhurst-Gilbert, Hazelwood, Centennial and 12 other neighborhoods. Learn about District 1. Candace Avalos District 1 Councilor Jamie Dunphy District 1 - Council President Loretta Smith District 1 Councilor District 2 Cully, St. Johns, Concordia and 26 other neighborhoods. Learn about District 2. Dan Ryan District 2 Councilor Elana Pirtle-Guiney District 2 Councilor Sameer Kanal District 2 Councilor District 3 Montavilla, Brentwood-Darlington, Richmond and 18 other neighborhoods. Learn about District 3. Angelita Morillo District 3 Councilor Steve Novick District 3 Councilor Tiffany Koyama Lane District 3 Councilor District 4 Northwest District, Portland Downtown, Sellwood-Moreland and 32 other neighborhoods. Learn about District 4. Eric Zimmerman District 4 Councilor Mitch Green District 4 Councilor Olivia Clark District 4 - Council Vice President See something we could improve on this page? Give website feedback. Welcome to Portland, Oregon Popular searches federal government business tax charter, code, policies council agenda employee portal find a park jobs recreation class or activity sewer and water bill sanctuary city Apply or file jobs, licenses, financial assistance Engage volunteer, advise, comment, testify, attend Permits construction, parking, trees, events and conditional use Pay bills, taxes, fees Report noise, water concerns, pollution, other complaints Find information, resources, data Find services and information by topic Access and ADA accommodations Biking City budget City planning City projects Community education and outreach Construction and development Economic development Environment Fire and life safety Fire and medical response Garbage and recycling Jobs and internships Open data, statistics, and maps Operating a business in Portland Parking Parks, recreation, and activities Police and safety Rent or own property Sidewalks Transportation and roads Trees Visiting Water, stormwater, and sewer Administrative and Council Leadership Keith Wilson Mayor Keith Wilson is the 54th Mayor of Portland, OR. He was elected in November 2024 and took office in January 2025. Raymond C. Lee III City Administrator Raymond C. Lee III is serving as the City Administrator of Portland, OR. He was appointed by Mayor Keith Wilson in December 2025. Simone Rede City Auditor Simone Rede is the City Auditor of Portland, OR. She was first elected in May 2022 and was re-elected in November 2024. Olivia Clark District 4 - Council Vice President Olivia Clark is the City Council Vice President. She was voted in as council vice president in January 2026. Jamie Dunphy District 1 - Council President Jamie Dunphy is the City Council President. He was voted in as council president in January 2026. City Council Members District 1 Powellhurst-Gilbert, Hazelwood, Centennial and 12 other neighborhoods. Learn about District 1. Candace Avalos District 1 Councilor Jamie Dunphy District 1 - Council President Loretta Smith District 1 Councilor District 2 Cully, St. Johns, Concordia and 26 other neighborhoods. Learn about District 2. Dan Ryan District 2 Councilor Elana Pirtle-Guiney District 2 Councilor Sameer Kanal District 2 Councilor District 3 Montavilla, Brentwood-Darlington, Richmond and 18 other neighborhoods. Learn about District 3. Angelita Morillo District 3 Councilor Steve Novick District 3 Councilor Tiffany Koyama Lane District 3 Councilor District 4 Northwest District, Portland Downtown, Sellwood-Moreland and 32 other neighborhoods. Learn about District 4. Eric Zimmerman District 4 Councilor Mitch Green District 4 Councilor Olivia Clark District 4 - Council Vice President federal government business tax charter, code, policies council agenda employee portal find a park jobs recreation class or activity sewer and water bill sanctuary city Apply or file jobs, licenses, financial assistance Engage volunteer, advise, comment, testify, attend Permits construction, parking, trees, events and conditional use Pay bills, taxes, fees Report noise, water concerns, pollution, other complaints Find information, resources, data Access and ADA accommodations Biking City budget City planning City projects Community education and outreach Construction and development Economic development Environment Fire and life safety Fire and medical response Garbage and recycling Jobs and internships Open data, statistics, and maps Operating a business in Portland Parking Parks, recreation, and activities Police and safety Rent or own property Sidewalks Transportation and roads Trees Visiting Water, stormwater, and sewer Keith Wilson Mayor Keith Wilson is the 54th Mayor of Portland, OR. He was elected in November 2024 and took office in January 2025. Raymond C. Lee III City Administrator Raymond C. Lee III is serving as the City Administrator of Portland, OR. He was appointed by Mayor Keith Wilson in December 2025. Simone Rede City Auditor Simone Rede is the City Auditor of Portland, OR. She was first elected in May 2022 and was re-elected in November 2024. Olivia Clark District 4 - Council Vice President Olivia Clark is the City Council Vice President. She was voted in as council vice president in January 2026. Jamie Dunphy District 1 - Council President Jamie Dunphy is the City Council President. He was voted in as council president in January 2026. District 1 Powellhurst-Gilbert, Hazelwood, Centennial and 12 other neighborhoods. Learn about District 1. Candace Avalos District 1 Councilor Jamie Dunphy District 1 - Council President Loretta Smith District 1 Councilor District 2 Cully, St. Johns, Concordia and 26 other neighborhoods. Learn about District 2. Dan Ryan District 2 Councilor Elana Pirtle-Guiney District 2 Councilor Sameer Kanal District 2 Councilor District 3 Montavilla, Brentwood-Darlington, Richmond and 18 other neighborhoods. Learn about District 3. Angelita Morillo District 3 Councilor Steve Novick District 3 Councilor Tiffany Koyama Lane District 3 Councilor District 4 Northwest District, Portland Downtown, Sellwood-Moreland and 32 other neighborhoods. Learn about District 4. Eric Zimmerman District 4 Councilor Mitch Green District 4 Councilor Olivia Clark District 4 - Council Vice President See something we could improve on this page? Give website feedback.
